I'm absolutely convinced this will
eradicate and cure Alzheimer's. Really,
the data don't lie and I'm a data guy
and that the future of medicine and
healthcare around the globe is going to
be dependent upon this. Dr. Nathan Bryan
is the biochemist whose cuttingedge
research suggests how one crucial
molecule can impact our health, brain
function and longevity. That molecule is
nitric oxide. Nitric oxide is a ziggling
molecule in the human body which
regulates things like blood flow and
oxygen delivery. And the loss of nitric
oxide production is the earliest event
in the onset progression of age- related
chronic disease. So things like erectile
dysfunction, diabetes, Alzheimer's, high
blood pressure, which is the number one
driver of cardiovascular disease, which
is the number one killer of men and
women worldwide. And 50% of the patients
that are treated with prescription
medication don't respond with better
blood pressure because they aren't
targeted toward nitric oxide. But most
people have never heard of this. They
don't know that if you can't walk up a
flight of steps or exercise moderately
for 15, 20 minutes, then you're nitric
oxide deficient. They don't know that
most toothpaste and mouthwash is killing
the oral microbiome that's partly
responsible for production of nitric
oxide but no one is interested in curing
human disease because medicine is a
business and the epiphany for me came
because my dad had a car accident and he
developed these non-healing wounds and I
saw the failure of the standard of care
to treat dad's wounds and so I just
thought that there had to be a better
way and simply by giving nitric oxide
I've healed this wound within 6 months.
That's crazy. So, how do I improve my
nitric oxide levels? It's what you
shouldn't be doing, and we'll cover
those step by step. Number one, you have
to avoid.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guests
that you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much. Dr. Nathan Brian, you have
committed much of your life to writing
about and educating people on a subject
that I know absolutely nothing about.
But from doing the research for today,
I'm pretty shocked that I don't know
more about this subject. So for those
people who have just clicked to listen
to this conversation, can you tell them
the mission you're on and why it's so
important? Yeah. Well, thanks so much
for having this conversation with me. I
think that illustrates the problem,
right? Someone as informed as you don't
know anything or never heard of nitric
oxide. So, it's important for us to just
make a distinction between um like
nitric gas that people, you know, inhale
and that used if you played like uh some
of those racing car games, you press a
button and the car goes really fast. If
you That's nitrous. Nitrous nitrous.
These are two separate things. No, very
Yeah, very good point. So, this is not
nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide is I mean a
medicine is a dental anesthetic, right?
It's a gas. It's called laughing gas.
That's N2O. That's the chemical formula.
What we're talking about is nitric oxide
or NO, one nitrogen, one oxygen. But
yeah, they sound very similar, but
they're completely different. This
molecule is is foundational for human
health and longevity. So nitric oxide is
a gas. It's a naturally produced
molecule. It's a signaling molecule in
the human body. And so it's it regulates
things like blood flow and oxygen
delivery. And it mobilizes our own stem
cells to help us recover and repair and
replace dysfunctional cells. that uh
improves energy production inside the
cell and it regulates blood flow. You
know, when we begin to exercise, if we
want to recall memory, that's dependent
upon adequate blood flow to the organs.
If we're, you know, it's intimately
involved in sexual activity and dilation
of the sex organs for sexual function.
So, what we're finding is that the older
we get, the less nitric oxide we
naturally produced. And now today,
that's recognized as the earliest event
in the onset and progression of age-
related chronic disease. So my mission
is to inform and educate the global
population on how important number one
what nitric oxide is, how it's produced
in the human body, what goes wrong in
people that can't make it, and then
perhaps most importantly, how do we
prevent that age related decline in
nitric oxide production so everybody can
be empowered to take control of their
own health and prevent age related
disease? And that's what the science
tells us, but as you illustrated, most
people have never heard of this. I mean,
this graph, which I'll put on the screen
for anyone watching, kind of illustrates
what you're talking about. And quite
notably, this decline seems to start
when you're 30 years old, which is how
old I am right now. So, well, you know,
that's if you look at population based
studies at different age groups, we see
about a 10 to 12% decline in what we
call endothelial function per decade.
So, that means so nitric oxide is a gas.
It's produced in the endothelium. So the
endothelium is the single layer of cells
that line every blood vessel throughout
the body. So the function of these
endothelial cells is to regulate
vascular tone and to regulate you know
solute exchange and extravisation or
transport of molecules across that
endothelial layer. And so when your
endothelial cells can no longer make
nitric oxide gas, they no longer dilate.
So the blood vessels become constricted.
You start to get inflammation. you get
stiff arteries, plaque deposition, and
that's what starts cardiovascular
disease or atlascerosis, which So
someone that's struggling with their
nitric oxide levels at the moment, what
kind of symptoms would they experience?
Well, we know there's a hierarchy,
right? So the first sign and symptom of
nitric oxide deficiency is usually
erectile dysfunction. And when you think
about this, when we're stimulated or
we're about to have intimacy with our
partner, we have to dilate the blood
vessels. So in erections in both men and
women are dependent upon dilation of the
blood vessels to get engorgment to get
increase in blood flow. And that's what
an erection is. But if those blood
vessels can't make nitric oxide, the
blood vessels don't dilate. So there's
no increase in blood flow. There's no
engorgment. And that's by definition
what we call in erectile dysfunction.
And it's the same in men and women,
right? Whether it's the penis or the
clitoris or the labia, you have to have
an increase in blood flow. And without
nitric oxide, there's no increase in
blood flow. So that's number one. And we
call that the canary in the coal mine
because for years, people thought it was
a lifestyle disorder, right? Well,
erectile dysfunction. Yeah. But now it's
recognized that it's a symptom of loss
of nitric oxide and really an
accelerated form of cardiovascular
disease. So we have to focus on the
vascular component of erectile
dysfunction. What other diseases are
linked to nitric oxide
deficiency. So if if you don't correct
the ED then what you start to see is an
increase in blood pressure. And when you
think about this mechanistically. So we
have you know a finite volume of blood
that's pumping throughout our body every
day every second. And if you can make
nitric oxide the blood vessels are more
dilated. So now we're pumping that
volume through, you know, more dilated
blood vessels. But if we lose the
ability to produce nitric oxide, now you
don't get the dilation. Now you have
smaller blood vessels. You're pumping
that same volume of blood through
smaller pipes. And simple physics tells
us that blood pressure goes up. Okay? So
you're going to have cardiovascular
challenges. Well, you're going to have
high blood pressure or
hypertension. And at least in the US,
and I think these these statistics
probably are worldwide, but two out of
three Americans have an unsafe elevation
in blood pressure.
And 50% of the people that are given
prescription medications to treat their
blood pressure do not respond with
better blood pressure. It's because most
of the drugs out there, whether they're
ACE inhibitors, what's called angotensin
receptor blockers, calcium channel
antagonists, the main classes of drugs
that treat high blood pressure, aren't
targeted toward restoration of nitric
oxide. So that's why we call that
resistant hypertension. They're
resistant to traditional therapies. And
the reason they're resistant is because
it's a nitric oxide problem and those
drugs aren't designed to affect nitric
oxide production or improve it. Was
there a an aha moment in your career
where you became particularly interested
in this subject? Because you could have
committed your life to studying any
facet of health or or science, but for
some reason you chose nitric oxide as
the thing that you chose to focus on.
What was that eureka moment? You know,
for me it was I was a student at LSU
School of Medicine. Um, this was the
late 90s, maybe early 2000s, but a Nobel
Prize had just been awarded for the
discovery of nitric oxide. There were
three US scientists that were awarded
the Nobel Prize in physiology and
medicine in
1998. And I was very fortunate at the
time. I was a young student, probably a
first year student, and Lou Ignaro, who
had just won the Nobel Prize for the
discovery of nitric oxide, came and
spoke and gave a lecture before the
student body. And I had a chance to have
a conversation with him afterwards and I
was fortunate to be invited to have
dinner with him that night. And he made
a very poignant statement to me. He
goes, "If we if the scientific community
can figure out how to restore the
production of nitric oxide, it'll change
the world and it'll change the landscape
of medicine." because even then what is
that 25 26 years ago that it was
recognized that a loss of nitric oxide
production is leading to the onset and
development of many poorly managed age-
related chronic diseases. So I go that's
a very profound statement from a guy who
just won the Nobel Prize. But that was
the first kind of eureka moment for me
that stimulated the interest. But then
my dad and I talk about it in the book
is a dad is 76 years old. In 1984 he had
a car accident. It left him paralyzed
from the midback down. So the majority
of my life, even as a kid, I was
treating dad's wounds, decubitous
ulcers, pressure ulcers on his feet, on
his butt, and he developed these
non-healing wounds. He was diabetic, he
was parapolgic, poor blood flow,
hypertension, and he developed a
non-healing wound. And no wound care doc
that I took him to could heal this
wound. So I started making a topical
nitric oxide, and I've healed this wound
within a per four years of non-healing.
I healed it within 6 months simply by
giving nitric oxide and getting blood
flow to that wound, killing the
infection in the wound. And this was in
a 60something year old paraplegic
diabetic sedentary old
man. What you went through as a young
man to me appears to be such an
important sort of throughine with all
the work that you do and chose to do.
There is this overarching question which
is even like why did you go into
medicine? Why did you want to help
people? Where did that come from in you?
And I feel like there's clues in that to
some degree based on what I I read about
your family, your early upbringing, the
divorce of your parents, and then
ultimately your dad getting in a car car
accident and being paralyzed. Is that an
accurate suspicion?
You know, I certainly it directed kind
of my my life because I witnessed the
failure of the standard of care to treat
dad with what I thought should be pretty
simple. I mean we have again the most
advanced technology medical technology
best medical schools in the world and
yet we can't treat a wound we can't
address the hypertension we can't
address the diabetes medically and so I
just thought that there had to be a
better way it's still with you now isn't
it
yeah but I you know I see
um you know dad when think I'm having a
bad day. I just think, look, I'm not in
a wheelchair. I got my health. So, no
matter how bad I think, I got it. It
could always be worse. So, I just wake
up every day with a grateful heart. And,
you know, some days are good, some days
are bad, but I always realize it could
always be better, but it could be a hell
of a lot worse. So, I don't complain.
And who are you? What are all the
reference points? What's the experience
you've had in your career that have
filled up your sort of buckets of
knowledge that you bring forth today?
Like what what have you studied? Where
have you been? I was in molecular and
cellular physiology. Got a PhD in
molecular and cellular physiology. And
that was I was recruited by Fred Murad,
one of the other guys who shared the
Nobel Prize to join the faculty at the
University of Texas Health Science
Center in Houston, which is the world's
largest medical center, but it's part of
the University of Texas system. So I was
recruited as a professor of molecular
medicine, published probably well over a
hundred peer-reviewed scientific
publications. I've edited several
medical textbooks on the subject. I
taught in medical school and then I
resigned from academia I guess several
years ago uh during COVID to focus on
the next phase of my career is taking
this 25 years of science and research
and
discovery and now bringing that to the
four for safe and effective product
technology drug therapies to eradicate a
lot of these poorly managed chronic
diseases that you know we're faced with
today. So let me get this straight. I'll
repeat back to you what I think I
understand about nitric oxide and you
tell me if it's accurate. So this nitric
oxide is a chemical that is in all the
blood cells of my body and it allows my
blood cells to basically expand open up
so blood can flow through there. So if I
it dilates it dilates the smooth muscle.
So it's not affecting the cells per se
but it's dilating the smooth muscle that
surrounds the blood vessels that leads
to relaxation and dilation. Fine. So my
blood cells would then expand your blood
vessels and more blood would go through
there. But if I'm deficient, that
mechanism doesn't work and my blood
cells wouldn't expand ultimately expand
through the relaxation of the muscles.
That's right. And therefore, I would
have higher blood pressure which can
lead to a series of downstream diseases
and consequences. And so when we look at
the graph that I showed a second ago
where we're seeing for anyone that can't
see this graph because you're listening
on audio, we're
seeing nitric oxide levels in young
people up to the age of roughly around
20 are optimal. And then from about 30
to 70, there's this tremendous sort of
80 90% drop. When I look at that graph
though, my question becomes, is that not
just aging? Is that not just normal? Is
that not just inevitable? Well, yeah,
there are a lot of things that occur
with aging, right? We lose growth
hormone with age. We lose u you know,
many hormones. Uh nitric oxide is a is a
hormone that we we first discovered
nitric oxide as a hormone back in
2007. But to understand aging, you have
to understand what leads to aging. So
aging from my perspective is the
inability to repair and replace
dysfunctional cells. Right? every day we
wear ourselves out and we just got to
and if we can repair and replace
dysfunctional cells then we combat or at
least prolong the aging
process. So what the science tells us in
nitric oxide is this that loss of nitric
oxide production is the earliest event
in the onset progression of age- related
chronic disease. So as that graph
implies it is part of the aging process
but it doesn't have to be right because
today we know we can shift that curve to
the left or to the right. So we can
accelerate it. And you see this today
with 18, 20 year old kids that are have
high blood pressure, they have diabetes,
they have erectile dysfunction, they
have learning and and cognitive uh
impairment and those are all symptoms of
nitric oxide deficiency. And to the
contrary, we if we see 50, 60, 70 year
old patients that would fit on a 30 or
40 year old scale on that graph. So this
this doesn't have to be the case. We
know how to prevent this age- related
decline in nitric oxide production. You
know, I'm I'm the best example. I'm 51
years old, but I've got the vascular age
of a 36 year old because I employ these
principles to prevent this age- related
decline in nitric oxide production. And
when you say you've got the vascular age
of a 36-y old, how how does one measure
that? You look at the sort of vascular
health of your You can So, there's
there's several objective measures of of
biological age. Obviously, we can affect
our chronological age, right? But we can
certainly affect our biological age. So
what you can do, there's databases now
of what we call croted inima media
thickness. So they take an ultrasound
and look at your corroted arteries and
they can look at what's called smooth
muscle hyperlasia or the thickness of
the inima and compare it to a database
of age matched kind of really it's
you're comparing against your
colleagues. So that's one way. Another
way is looking at what's called flow
mediated dilitation or endothelial
function. And again through database of
hundreds of thousands or millions of
patients you can figure out where you
fall on that spectrum on endothelial
function. And then there's um you know
other mark markers looking at histone
modification of the DNA methylation
profiles. there's a company or
technology called glyen age that looks
at certain markers uh that can then
define a biological age for each
individual. So by age 40 we have lost
about 50% of our ability to produce
nitric oxide in our blood vessels and we
lose 10 to 12% of nitric oxide
production per decade. This is all
according to your book. And by age 70 to
80, nitric oxide levels in blood vessels
can be 75% lower than in young
adults. A Japanese study found a 75%
reduction in nitric oxide production in
people aged 70 to 80 compared to 20 year
olds. Interesting.
So in terms of chronic disease that is
downstream from me losing nitric oxide
level. Can you give me a bit of a menu
of chronic disease that is associated
with this nitric oxide deficiency? Yep.
We've touched on them. So erectile
dysfunction um 50% of the men over the
age of 40 self-report erectile
dysfunction. That's in the US. So think
about that. 50% self-report. I think the
numbers are higher because most 40 year
olds that I know are never going to
admit that they have erectile
dysfunction. So I think the numbers are
even worse. So that's one. High blood
pressure. Again, 50% of the patients
that are treated with prescription
medication don't respond with better
blood pressure. That's a huge problem
because high blood pressure is the
number one driver of cardiovascular
disease, which is the number one killer
of men and women worldwide. Number
three, metabolic disease and diabetes.
We published in 2011 that nitric oxide
production is necessary for insulin
signaling. If the cell can't make nitric
oxide, you develop insulin resistance.
So, diabetes, a global pandemic. Nine
out of 10 Americans are metabolically
unfit. The other thing is exercise
intolerance. If you if you try to start
an exercise regimen and you can't walk
up a flight of steps or exercise
moderately for 15, 20, 30 minutes, then
you're nitric oxide deficient. And then
the other one is uh obviously
Alzheimer's because Alzheimer's is a
vascular disease. It's reduced blood
flow to the uh to the brain we call
focal eskemia. There's insulin
resistance. You know Alzheimer's has
been called diabetes type three. So you
can't get it glucose into the cell.
That's the primary energy source or
substrate of the brain. Oxidative stress
and immune dysfunction. And then you get
um misfolded proteins and that shows up
as the tangles and the amaloid plaque
that we see in Alzheimer's patients.
So if we can restore and nitric oxide
corrects every single thing we know
about Alzheimer's. It improves blood
flow to the brain. It improves glucose
uptake. So it overcomes the metabolic
aspect of Alzheimer's. It reduces
inflammation. In fact, a number of my
patents are on a method of reducing
inflammation. It inhibits the oxidative
stress we see in in Alzheimer's and
neurological disease. And it prevents
the immune dysfunction. And when you do
that, when you restore blood flow and
you get nutrients and oxygen in and you
take out the metabolic waste products,
there's no misfolding of protein. So you
don't get the amaloid plaque, you don't
get the tangles. So this simple molecule
nitric oxide gas I'm absolutely
convinced will eradicate and cure
Alzheimer's really because it it
addresses every physiological root cause
of Alzheimer's if you can get it
administered therapeutically to patients
early enough or no I think that's a very
key because the success or failure of
any clinical trial any drug in any
clinical trial is dependent upon the
design of the clinical trial and what
patients at what stage of disease that
you enroll these patients. So what are
the inclusion criteria and what are the
exclusion
criteria and there's a stage in every
disease whether it's heart disease,
kidney disease, Alzheimer's where you've
reached a point of no return. There's
really no medical therapy that's going
to reverse that disease because it's
progressed to a state that's
irreversible. So I think what we try to
do is take take patients early in the
process what we call vascular dementia
mild cognitive impairment early
Alzheimer's because what I want to be
able to demonstrate is two things number
one can we stop the progression of
disease once it's started can we stop
the progression and then number two is
we want to enroll patients far enough
along to where we can show regression so
can you move can you move the needle
back and so That's a very kind of a
specific and finite patient population.
When you design a clinical study, number
one, at the at the absolute worst, we
want to stop progression. At the
absolute best, we want to show that we
can regress disease. And that's the goal
of therapy is that you understand the
mechanism of disease to the extent that
you can treat it, you can prevent it,
you can reverse it, and you can cure it.
Is there something you believe that the
traditional world of medicine and maybe
the traditional
media don't believe?
Yeah, I believe in the truth and I come
from a very objective scientific
background. So everything that we do is
based on objective uh data. I say this
because I was listening to your
interview before and there were several
moments in the interview where you'd
reference that. You'd say things like
they don't they don't want you to know
this or they don't they won't tell you
this. No, absolutely. Because you know
the we talk about epiphies and eureka
moments in science, but for
me one of the kind of complete change in
paradigm in the way that I think was
changed in when I was in academia and
teaching in medical school and doing
research in in an academic institution.
And you start to think what we in the
scientific community we un we've cured
every disease every disease known to man
we've cured it in rats and mice. So then
the question is why isn't this
translated into patient care? Why can't
we do this in humans? Number one in in
animal experiments we control their
environment. We control their food. We
control their life cycle. We control
everything about them. You can't do that
in everybody has a different diet.
Everybody has different drug therapy
that they're on or hygienic practices.
But then what I realized was because
when I was in academia, we wanted to
create this consortium, a center of
excellence for diseases.
Because my thought process
was, you know, western medicine is
siloed, right? If you have a heart
problem, you go to a cardiologist.
You've got a GI problem, you go to
gastronurologist. If you got a
neurological problem, you go to a
neurologist or psychiatrist. But none of
these disciplines talk to one another.
So if you go to that neurologist is
going to treat that condition much
different than the cardiologist would,
much different than the GI doc would.
But what if we're looking at the exact
same root
cause? And so my philosophy, well, let's
create a center of excellence and let's
bring everybody in the room. Let's bring
the GI docs, the the neurologists, the
cardiologists, the geneticists, the
pulmonary docs, the kidney docs, the
renal docs, and let's let's understand
this kind of wheel and cog because
everything occurs at the mitochondria
subcellular level and energy production
and then basically everything can can
manifest from that. But what I quickly
realized when you when you go to for
instance MD Anderson and trying to treat
cancer, no one is interested in curing
human disease. Because the epiphany for
me came because
medicine is a business. It's a
for-profit business. In fact, it's the
largest business and economic model in
the world. Trillion dollar annualized
market.
And most of these drug companies who
influence and pay and support scientific
journals, JAMAMA, New England Journal of
Medicine, the major publications, the
major journals, and they're influencing
regulation and policy and
FDA. And so when you figure out that
there's undue influence by these
for-profit companies, because the number
one rule of business, as you know, as an
entrepreneur and a business guy, is
acquire a customer and keep that
customer as long as you can. call it
lifetime value of that customer. And
that's what medicine is. They get you
they you acquire you as a customer. They
put you on a drug. That drug has side
effects. They have to put you on another
drug to mitigate the side effects of
that drug. Now you got side effects from
that polyarm pharmacy. They have to put
you on another drug to mitigate those
side effects. And now you look up and
people who are 50 to 60 years old and
older are on 10, 12, 18 different
medications. That's the best financial
model in the world.
So it's a great financial model but it's
at the expense of our health and the
health of everybody living on in the
world and in the US you know we have the
sickest population in the world now for
the first time in the history of western
medicine have discussions between
physician and patient how do we wean you
off this drug that conversation has
never had before because it's always if
this doesn't work come back and I'll
prescribe you more drugs let's do the
opposite you come back and let's
understand the root of cause of disease
let's say okay well if we are addressing
this, you don't need this medication.
And if you don't need this medication,
you don't need this medication. And now,
for the first time, you start weaning
patients off of drugs. And what happens?
You're now impeding upon the market
share of these multi-billion dollar drug
companies who make their living buying
influence, regulating policy,
influencing policy. And the FDA is a
stepping stone to a board seat of big
pharma. Every former FDA official in the
US for the past 20 or 30 years goes on
to become multi-million dollar salaried
employee from big pharma. It has to
stop. Despite spending nearly 20% of the
United States GDP on healthcare, the US
ranks last overall on health outcomes
among high income countries, including
having the highest infant mortality
rates and lowest life expectancy.
It's like unbelievable. No, I mean
that's that's depressing. I mean, but
those are the facts
and the you have to understand those
those are indisputable
data, right? And so when people hear
that they go they this but when you look
at kind of the system and I don't blame
doctors because doctors are get into
this field, you know, I was on the
admissions committee to UT medical
school for a number of years. So we
interviewed a lot of these young kids,
figure out what their motivation was.
Will they have a successful career in
medicine? And almost everyone I mean
there's always the exception but
everyone gets into medicine because they
want to make make a difference. They're
driven by curiosity and most of them
want to leave a lasting legacy and help
people. That's what drives uh entry into
healthcare. But when you look at the
system in which they're trained in, it
prevents them. It basically handcuffs
them. Because when you figure out the
pay, the economic model of medicine,
once you make a diagnosis, now you've
got a diagnosible disease to which you
have a finite number of responses,
right? If you make this diagnosis,
that's called an ICD10 code, which is
reimburseable and that's how you get
paid. So once you make a diagnosis, you
only have a finite list of things you
can do. You can't ask that question and
go, well, what's really causing this?
and spend, you know, 90 minutes with
that patient because most physicians
have to see 60, 70, 80 patients a day to
pay the bills to cover their overhead.
So, it's a factory. You come in, you
look at, you've got a a transcriber, you
make a diagnosis. Okay, I can I'm going
to prescribe this medication. Come back
in two weeks or six months and we'll see
where you are. And then it's just it's a
term, it's a meal. But as you me, the
data don't lie, right? sickest
population, highest infant mortality in
the most industrialized nation in the
world. And according to the data,
Americans are spending about 13 years of
their life living with disease. And that
is significantly higher than many other
highincome western countries. So
although life expectancy, you know,
might be 70 80 years old, you're going
to spend almost 15 years of that time
living with disease. So your health span
is um really probably the more important
thing to be focusing on, not your
lifespan. And so when we talk about
nitric oxide, I've heard you describe it
as the molecule of longevity. For sure.
Why why' you say that? Why do you say
that? Well, again, longevity is this
emerging field that's driven by how do
we live longer? How do we increase our
health span and longevity? Right?
Because I think we can all agree that
nobody wants to live to be 100 years old
if we spend the last 25 of that years
incapacitated in a diaper, unable to get
out of bed, right? That's not living. So
when I look at longevity, I look at kind
of what are the hallmarks of longevity?
What defines longevity, right? How do we
live longer, healthier life free of
disease? And really there's three
objective measures. There is a stem
cells. You know, this whole field of
regenerative medicine is based on
mobilizing our own stem cells or
deploying
u stem cells throughout the body to
repair and replace dysfunctional cells.
So these stem cells are cells that can
basically act as like band-aids, repairs
for any part of our body. Well, we call
them pur potent stem cells. So mean that
and some of these are bone marrow
derived. Some of these are what we call
stromal vascular fraction that you get
from the atapost tissue or the fat. Pur
potent would mean pur potent means they
can that stem cell can go and become a
neuron. That stem cell can go to the
heart and become a functional meioy. It
can go and become a macrofase or an
immune cell, white blood cell. So pur
potent means it can become many things
whatever it needs to be. In some cases,
the amount of stem cells present in our
bone marrow get smaller with age. The
number of cells decrease with age. But
fortunately or unfortunately, the older
we get, the more fat we deposit. And so
we have a number of stem cells in our
fat. So we increase the number of stem
cells in our fat. So the problem with
aging and longevity is when we lose the
ability to mobilize our own stem cells.
We can't we can't repair and replace
dysfunctional cells. So we have these
what we call zombie cells or
scinsesscent cells. They're there but
they can't do their job. They're
dysfunctional and that's what leads to
age. Number two, it's telomeirs. And
telomeirs are the ends of the
chromosomes of our
DNA. And so the they're the very end. So
it's like the um the the tips of the sho
strings, right? That prevent the sho
string from fraying. Yeah. And those are
like the telomeir. So as long as you
have a functional telomeir and it
prevents it from getting shorter then
shorter telomeir shorter lifespan longer
telomeres longer lifespan. So when
telomeirs get shorter it decreases our
lifespan and longevity. And then the
third one is mitochondrial function.
Every age- related chronic disease you
have a lower number of mitochondria per
cell and the mitochondria that are
present aren't functional. So you get a
what's called an uncoupling of the
electron transport chain inside the
inner mitochondrial membrane and you can
no longer effectively produce cellular
energy or
ATP. So nitric oxide is the foundational
longevity longevity molecule because
nitric oxide is the signal in the body
that tells our stem cells to mobilize
and differentiate. Without nitric oxide
you have less number of circulating stem
cells. Nitric oxide activates the enzyme
toase which prevents telomeir
shortening. Without nitric oxide you
don't get activation of tomeorase
telomeir shorten and then nitric oxide
is the signal in the cell that tells the
cell I need more mitochondria and I need
these mitochondria to be more efficient
generate more cellular energy with less
oxygen. So when you when you restore
nitric oxide you address all three
aspects of longevity and there's no
other molecule on the body that does
that. You know Brian Johnson, don't you?
Yes. What do you think of Brian Johnson?
You know, I would never replicate or try
to um do what he does. I don't think
it's the proper approach, you know, and
I I don't I don't mean to criticize
people because this whole field of
biohacking, you know, you get people who
have no science background, no medical
background, no biochemical background,
and yet they're out there
influencing millions of people that
follow them. And many times they're
giving really bad advice. Not
intentionally. It's because of
ignorance. They just don't know. They
don't know the science. They don't know
the medicine behind it. So before you go
and follow any influencer or
biohacker, number one, look at their
credentials. And if they don't have any
science background, if they're, you
know, formal technologist or, you know,
come from anything besides science and
medicine, you really need to do a little
bit of deep dive and make sure that what
they're giving you is scientifically
valid or recommending. He seems to be a
fan of um the role of nitric oxide as it
relates to longevity though. He seems to
have said positive things about um
nitric oxide and its impact on improving
your cardiovascular health. Yeah. I
think as we advance the science and we
we do more to communicate the complex
science into you know layman's terms
where the the non-scientists non-medical
professionals can understand it and
appreciate it. I think more people are
going to pick up to that. But there's
also some well-known biohackers with
influences of, you know, millions of
people that still say that nitric oxide
is a toxin that inhibits mitochondrial
respiration and it should be avoided. Is
there such thing as having too much
nitric oxide though? Because if people
hear this conversation today and they
rush out and they I don't know overdo
their nitric oxide by doing a bunch of
uh therapies. Yeah. Is that a risk?
Absolutely. You know, we know water is
essential, right? But we can drink too
much water and kill ourselves. You see
it on the news, you know, a couple times
a year called hypotonic lis. So, yeah,
dose dictates poison. And so, what we
have to do is make sure maintain the
integrity of the field to make sure that
if there are nitric oxide products out
there that number one, you don't overdo
it and and lead to, you know, health
issues or kill a consumer, kill a
patient. That could kill the entire
field. But we also understand that
there's only two signs of toxicity for
nitric oxide. So it's really pretty
straightforward. Number one, if you take
too much nitric oxide, you're going to
get an unsafe drop in blood pressure
because think about this. If you if you
take nitric oxide or you're enhancing
nitric oxide production through whatever
means, it's going to lead to systemic
vasoddilation. Now you've got that same
volume of blood pumping through much
larger pipes and you're going to have a
drop in blood pressure. And if you lose
profusion pressure, you're not going to
be able to peruse the brain because you
got to pump against gravity and you're
going to get lightheaded and you'll pass
out. And if that's prolonged, it leads
to es schemic end organ damage and organ
failure and it can be deadly. So that's
number one. And then number two is a
condition called met hemoglobinia. And
that's a big word meaning that your it
oxidizes the iron of hemoglobin and
reduces your oxygen carrying capacity.
So you'll become cyanotic. You'll get
blue around the lips. your extremities
will turn will turn um you know white
from lack of profusion or lack of oxygen
but you never see that I mean you really
never see clinical met hemoglobinia
fortunately your your blood pressure
will drop to an unsafe level long before
you get any accumulation of met
hemoglobinia so on this point of
longevity then one of the points you
mentioned there was telmir length and
I've heard about telmir length because
I've heard about studies they've done in
rats and I think other rodents around
telmir length so it was discovered that
indiv individuals with shorter telomeres
had a death rate nearly twice of those
with longer telomeres. And you're
telling me that there has been research
done that shows how nitric oxide can
increase telmir length. Absolutely. So
we we understand at the DNA level at the
nuclear level that nitric oxide is is
what's called a collocicalizes with
estrogen recep receptor to allow for the
turning the the cell to turn on
transcription and translation of the
tomeorase enzyme. So it's not only
affecting the genetic transcription of
that protein but it's also regulating
the function of the enzyme. So without
nitric oxide you have less telomeir
tomeorase enzyme and that tomeorase
enzyme isn't functional. Okay. So nitric
oxide has an impact on the tomease
tomeorase enzyme. That's right. Tomeres
enzyme. So what happens with each
cellular division those telomeirs can
get shorter. Yeah. Right. But as long as
that tomeorase enzyme is active it
prevents the shortening of the very ends
of the chromosome. Okay. And just for
people that don't understand the um with
every replication as we age, we're
continually replicating ourselves to
restore and repair them, but in that
replication
process, harm is occurred sometimes.
Yeah. And different cell types have
different replication rates, right? So
the the epithelium of the gut is highly
regenerative, right? It's it's a
replicatable uh you replacing these
cells all the time because it's the
outside environment that you're having
to continue to replace those cells.
neurons to the exact opposite aren't
regenerative by nature. So we don't
typically make I mean we can it was once
thought that you can't regenerate
neurons but today we know we can but
yeah so it affects different organ
systems differently but the data are
clear shorter telomeres shorter
lifespan. The other thing that um I
wanted to talk to you about before we
really get into the heart of how do I
improve my nitric oxide levels keep them
at a healthy range while I age is nitric
oxide's relationship with the oral
microbiome. Yeah. I had a conversation
on this podcast not too long ago about
the oral microbiome. Again, another
subject I hadn't thought much about, but
is there a relationship there? No doubt.
I mean, this is this is probably 20 year
old science
um where we find that, you know,
probably 20 years ago, the microbiome
project was complete. And what that
means is that the bacteria that live in
and on our body were completely mapped
out and these communities were
identified in the gut, started in the
gut, the gastrointestinal tract. And
then, you know, you can you can culture
the the this the skin flora. There's
bacteria that live on our skin. There
are bacteria that live in our colon.
There are bacteria in women that that
that reside in the in the vagina. And so
all of these different ecologies of
bacteria that live in and on the body
are there to do things to help the human
host, right? We call this symbiosis.
We're providing benefit to the bacteria
and the bacteria providing benefit to
the human host.
And so if you use antibiotics or
antiseptics to kill the bacteria that
live in and on our body, you get human
disease. I mean that's clear. And the
the best example is that there's no
physician in the world that would
recommend you or I take an antibiotic
every day for the rest of our lives.
Right? Do you agree with that? Yeah. And
why is that? Because the antibiotics are
killing the good bacteria. They kill the
infectious pathogen bacteria, but they
also destroy the entire microbiome. And
when you disrupt the microbiome, you get
systemic disease. You get vascular
disease, you get Alzheimer's, you get uh
leaky gut syndrome, you get autoimmune
disease, you get high blood pressure,
you get yeast infections, uh you get
overgrowth of candida, you get
parasites. So the bacteria are really
the
police of the human kind of
surveillance, right? So the n we have 10
times more bacteria cells that make up
the human than we have human cells. So
we're 10 times more bacteria than we are
human. And so if you destroy that
microbiome, then it leads to systemic
disease. We live in a culture where
we're constantly trying to kill
bacteria, right? like especially post
pandemic we're using all kinds of hand
washes and antiseptics and obviously the
the big I guess chemicals that we all
typically use are things like
mouthwashes
with uh which are again trying to just
clean out all the bacteria from our
mouths what how would you caution
someone on using these things and even
the like the antibacterial Yeah it's bad
news really
we give it to our children because we
want our kids to be clean and not to
have kids need to be
dirty you find and again you look at
epidemological data peop kids who grow
up in the in a rural area they're out in
the environment they're rolling in dirt
they're they're got dirt on them and
they have um you know they're inoculated
with a lot of bacterium those kids are
the healthiest people and and you look
later in life they have lower incidence
of cardiovascular disease diabetes they
have better immune dysfunction less
autoimmune disease so there's this whole
hy hygienic principle or hygienic
hypothesis of disease and I don't think
it's a hypothesis anymore. I think it's
proven out. So for me, I go back and I
go, "What? Why are we doing this? Why
are we using fluoride rinses in dental
offices? Why is there fluoride in our
toothpaste? Why is there fluoride in the
municipal water of 72% of municipalities
in the US when fluoride is a known
antiseptic? It's a chemical toxicant.
It's a a thyroid toxic. It kills your
thyroid and it's a neurological toxin."
And so when you go back and look at the
history of dentistry over a hundred
years ago, it was first identified that
oral
bacteria can be found in the plaque that
killed someone from an acute heart
attack. Right? People who died from
sudden cardiac death, they'll take the
thrombus or the embleis that oluded that
coronary artery and they basically biops
it and they find oral bacteria in that
plaque that caused the heart attack or
stroke.
So that told us there's an oral systemic
link. There's bacterial transllocation
of the pathogens. That's why bleeding
gums are a problem because you've got
bacteria in the mouth. If you got
bleeding gums, there's open blood
vessels for those bacteria to get into
our blood supply. Now they become
systemic, cause inflammation, plaque
rupture and heart attack and stroke. So
100 years ago with reason with good
reason they go, well let's treat with an
aneseptic. We have to kill all the
bacteria in the mouth. So if you have
bleeding gums, there's no translloca
transllocation of that in the systemic
circulation and we can prevent heart
attack or
stroke. That was a hundred years ago and
we've learned a lot in those hundred
years. Number one, it wasn't recognized
that we have a microbiome on our body in
our body. So now when I ask dentists all
the time, why do you use floor? And they
go, well, it's been used for hundred
years. And I go, I don't care what the
question is. That's the worst answer you
could provide just because we're doing
it because that's the way we've always
done it. Right? So now we have to
understand how do we selectively kill
the pathogens while maintaining a
healthy
microbiome. And so this this field
started probably in the I mean some of
the first papers were published probably
in the 90s showing that there were if
you use
mouthwash it destroyed the microbiome
and we saw an increase in blood
pressure. These papers were published in
the late 2000s. We we published on this
probably in like 2008 2009. We created
what's called an association. So people
who had the healthiest and most diverse
bacteria in their mouth had the best
blood
pressure. People who had the least
diverse oral microbiome and we we could
not culture any of these nitric oxide
producing bacteria appeared to have the
highest blood pressure. So that's what
we call association. It's not causation
but it's a nice association.
So in 2019 we published a paper showing
okay let's now let's see if we do if we
take normal intensive
patients young healthy people with good
nitric oxide good blood pressure and we
just give them mouthwash twice a day for
seven days to kill the entire oral
microbiome and then we do tongue
scrapings to see if we're killing the
bacteria and we do blood pressure
measurements and so we do that twice a
day for seven days. Seven days we bring
them back in. We measure their blood
pressure and then we stop for four days.
We say okay don't talk don't take
mouthwash for four days then come back
let's rememeasure your blood pressure
and let's do tongue scrapings and figure
out what's happening to this these
bacterial
communities. And what we found was that
if you eradicate the bacteria within 7
days your blood pressure goes up. So if
you use
mouthwash within seven days your blood
pressure goes up. I think it occurs
earlier, but what we we looked at seven
days. We only looked at day one at
baseline, seven days, and then four days
after stopping the mouthwash. But in one
21-year-old kid, his blood pressure went
up 26 millimeters of mercury, which is,
put that in context for me. That's
clinically hypertensive. So for every 1
millimeter increase in blood pressure,
that increases your risk of
cardiovascular disease by 1%.
So within 7 days, we increased this
kid's risk of cardiovascular disease by
26%. Simply by giving him mouthwash. And
explain to me in layman's terms the
mechanism there. What's going on?
Well, we're still trying to understand
mechanism. Again, we're at the
observational level. That's really
indisputable because these bacteria,
there's what we call nitrate reducing
bacteria and humans do not have this
enzyme. So nitrate is what's found in
green leafy vegetables, right? These
these plants assimilate nitrogen in the
soil in the form of nitrate. We consume
these vegetables. The nitrate is taken
up in the gut. It's concentrated in our
salivary glands. And the bacteria
perform this metabolism of nitrate into
nitrite and nitric oxide. And humans do
not have the the functional enzyme to do
this. So we're 100% dependent upon the
bacteria.
So then now because nitrate is inert in
humans, we we rely on the bacteria to
metabolize this molecule into a usable
form where we can make nitric oxide. So
when you're killing the bacterium now,
the nitrate is just being recirculated,
but you're you're you're urinating
because it's it's it's filtered across
the kidneys. You poop it out and you
sweat it out. So it's completely
unchanged unless you have the right
bacteria. And what we're finding is that
that oral production of nitride and
nitric oxide being produced in the acid
environment of the stomach is somehow
regulating resistance arteries in
dilation to normalize systemic blood
pressure. So if I don't have a healthy
oral
microbiome, then you have an elevation
in blood pressure. And much of the
things you you're talking to me about
today in terms of dietary
um changes won't have any effect anyway
because I need the bacteria to convert
it into nitric oxide as it relates there
are many benefits of of many nutrients
in foods particular plants that confer
some health benefits. But when we focus
specifically on the benefits of nitric
oxide from your diet if you don't have
the right oral bacteria you get zero
nitric oxide benefits from your diet.
Now, you're going to get, you know,
obviously hopefully vitamin A, vitamin
C, vitamin D from foods, fiber, other
phytonutrients, but in terms of the
blood pressure lowering effects of a,
for instance, a plant-based diet, if you
don't have the right bacteria, you get
zero benefits of that. Have you seen a
link between oral health and cancer?
Yes, absolutely. What have you seen?
People that have dental infections, root
canals, cavitations from previous
extraction sites have typically cancer.
It sets the stage for cancer cell growth
and
proliferation. So, and and I've, you
know, I made a controversial statement
on a on a previous podcast where I say
number one, I'm not an oncologist, but
people who have terminal metastatic
disease, who aren't ready to die, who
are sent home to die on hospice, somehow
find me and go, can you help me with
this cancer? And so the first thing I
always send them to is a dentist to see
do you have any active oral infections
that may have led to the development of
the primary tumor in the first place.
But obviously it's it's metastatic
meaning that it's now everywhere. It's
it's it's migrated outside that primary
tumor. But almost always without fail
they have an active oral infection. And
it may be a symptomatic infection to
where they know it and they have a
toothache or it may be an asymptomatic
infection where they don't even know
they got a dental infection. What
percentage of cancer patients that you
see that you then refer to a dentist
have an oral infection? People with
primary tumors, solid tumors. So we
categorize these in bloodborne cancers,
something like lymphoma, leukemia,
multiple myoma, which is a bloodborne
cancer. And those that have a solid
tumor, yeah, a primary tumor that starts
in the breast, the colon, the prostate,
the lungs, or the
liver without fail, 100% of them have
dental infections.
But cause and effect is not possible to
establish here, right? Because cause and
effect, no, I don't think we're there
yet. I think probably as the science
advances and people start to look at
this because you may
imagine if you have cancer and you've
been to the best cancer doctors in the
world and you've done surgery, you've
done chemo, you've done radiation,
you've gone through the standard of care
and the cancer comes back, it's
terminal, it's metastatic and you tell
when I tell people, well, you need to go
see a dentist.
I mean, many people laugh and they go,
"Have you what? What in the hell did you
just say? I've got cancer. I don't have
a dental problem." And I go, "Well,
perhaps you do." Because again, if you
go back and always look at back what's
what's held true throughout ages and if
you look at ayurveetic medicine, if you
look at traditional Chinese medicine, if
you look at
acupuncture, you know, if you go back
and you look, if you don't know what to
look for, you're never going to find it.
If you know what to look for, it's out
there. It's in the published literature.
But every tooth in the body is connected
to an organ system, right? And so these
are these are the meridians, the
acupuncture meridians. You know, the
analogy is they're circuit breakers. So
if you if you trip a breaker in your
home, there's no electricity going
through that circuit. So your oven
doesn't work, your refrigerator doesn't
work, or your lights go out. Well, the
body is electric, right? And how do we
diagnose death? No electrical activity,
right? Either through an EKG or an EEG.
So the body is electric and we're we're
batteries. And so if we get if that red
light comes on on our phone, it says we
have a low battery, everybody panics and
goes and plugs it in and charges, right?
And the human body is the exact same. We
lose voltage over time. And if you've
got a trip breaker from an infected
tooth, there's no voltage. There's no
circuitry going to that meridian that
feeds individual organs. So the the best
example is if you've got a root canal
and a 100% of root canal teeth are
infected and when you think and people
go well that's not true. Well think
about what a root canal is. You had a
toothache at some point because of an
infection. So you go to the dentist and
they pull the nerve root out of that
tooth. So you don't feel the pain
anymore because there's no nerve root
there. And they pull the blood supply
out of that tooth. Now you have no blood
supply to that tooth. And a tooth is a
crystallin structure. It's a living
organ with no blood supply and no nerve
root. That's a dead tissue. So if you
were to go in and we'd disconnect your
gallbladder, for example, and just cut
the blood supply to it, the nerve supply
to it, within seven or 10 days, you'd be
dead from sepsis. Nobody leaves dead
tissue in the
body. And so then what happens is when
you leave the dentist, what do they do?
They put you on an oral
antibiotic. But they must have forgotten
they took out the blood supply to that
infected site. So an oral antibiotic
isn't going to reach the sight of
infection. I mean to me when you think
when you sit back and think about this
and go who the hell does this and why do
they do it? Well it's because what we've
always done. So then what happens is
these anorobic bacteria they don't need
oxygen. They're sitting there in an
anorobic low oxygen environment and
they're just eating away at your
jawline. They're just like us do. They
they they metabolize. They take stuff
in. They poop waste out. Those waste
products uh accumulate. it shuts down
voltage and they eat away at your
jawline. So then you've got osteom
necrosis, osteomiitis and you don't even
know it and an x-ray will not show it.
And most dentists unfortunately still
use x-rays instead of a higher
resolution CT. It's really interesting.
I was doing some research in preparation
for this conversation around this
subject of oral microbiome and cancer
and the link there. And one particular
study that was done um published in the
New York Post but done by a team of
researchers found that this was done at
New York University as well. So it was
published by the New York Post and done
at New York University. They analyzed
saliva samples of over 160,000
participants over 15 years. Are you
familiar with this study? And they
identified over a dozen bacteria species
linked to a high risk of head and neck
cancers with certain bacteria increasing
the risk by 50%. Yeah. Of getting a
cancer, which is pretty shocking. Um,
literally I feel like texting my
assistant and asking us to book a oral
hygieneist and to change my mouthwash.
No matter where I am in the world, it
seems like everyone is drinking matcha.
And there's a good chance that that
matcha you're drinking is made by a
company that I've invested more than
seven figures in, who are a sponsor of
this podcast called Perfect Ted, because
they're the brand used globally by cafes
like Blank Street Coffee and Joe in the
Juice and many, many more. Not only can
you get Perfect Ted Match in cafes, but
you can now also make it at home much
cheaper in seconds using our flavored
matcha powders that I have here in front
of me. Perfect Ted matcher is ceremonial
grade and sourced from Japan. It is
smooth. It is naturally sweet. Not like
those bitter grassy matches that I tried
before. Perfect Ted. And if you are one
of those people that have told yourself
you don't like matcha, it's probably
because you haven't tried our Perfect
Ted Matcher. And you can find Perfect
Ted Matcher in the UK in Tesco,
Sainsbury's, Holland and Barrett and in
Waitro or Albertine if you're in the
Netherlands and on Amazon in the USA or
get the full range online at
perfectted.com where you can get 40% off
your first order with code
Steven40. This one change has
transformed how my team and I move,
train, and think about our bodies. When
Dr. Daniel Lieberman came on the diio.
He explained how modern shoes with their
cushioning and support are making our
feet weaker and less capable of doing
what nature intended them to do. We've
lost the natural strength and mobility
in our feet and this is leading to
issues like back pain and knee pain. I'd
already purchased a pair of Viva
barefoot shoes. So I showed them to
Daniel Lieberman and he told me that
they were exactly the type of shoe that
would help me restore natural foot
movement and rebuild my strength. But I
think it was planttoicitis that I had
where suddenly my feet started hurting
all the time. And after that I decided
to start strengthening my own foot by
using the Vivo barefoots. And research
from Liverpool University has backed
this up. They've shown that wearing Vivo
barefoot shoes for 6 months can increase
foot strength by up to
60%. Visit
vivarefoot.com/doac and use code
DOAC20 for 20% off. That's a
vivobarefoot.com/dac. Use code
DOAC20. A strong body starts with strong
feet. If I've just listened to
everything you've just said there and I
want to improve my oral microbiome, what
should I be doing? Well, I think the
most important thing we've learned is
what you shouldn't be doing. Yeah.
Right. So, it's not what should we do,
it's what we shouldn't be doing. Number
one, we have to get rid of fluoride. You
know, just this past weekend, I was
speaking at a dental conference in Salt
Lake City, and there were there people
there from the National Toxicology
Program, which in the US is the
organization tasked with if there's any
kind of risk of exposure of
environmental toxicant. They're charged
with doing the toxicology studies to see
if there's an increased risk. What is
the risk? And is there a safe level that
is without risk? And what they report is
that fluoride, there's no benefit of
fluoride. And it's all risk. It lowers
IQ in kids by as much as seven
points and it shuts down your thyroid
function and it's a neurotoxin. And as I
mentioned before, most
toothpaste has fluoride in it. And if
you read the back of your toothpaste, it
will tell you, at least in the US, I
don't know about in other countries, but
it says if you swallow this, call poison
control because it's a poison. They're
putting poison in toothpaste. And then
if you also pay attention, it says only
put a P-siz amount of toothpaste on your
toothbrush. A P size. But everybody that
I know fills the entire bristle of the
toothpaste with toothbrush with
toothpaste. So that's about 10 or 15,
sometimes 20 P-size amounts of
toothpaste. And a P-siz amount of
toothpaste contains about half a
milligram of fluoride. Now, if you're
using 10 20 times more than that P size,
now you're exposed to 5 milligrams, 10
milligrams of fluoride, and you don't
even have to swallow it. This is a very
small molecule, a molecular weight of
19. So, it's absorbed directly across
the bugal mucosa, the oral cavity, and
it becomes systemic. I'm not going to
use it anymore. No, you shouldn't. What
should I use instead? You have to use a
non florinated toothpaste. And what
about things like tongue scrapers? Now,
tongue scrapers, the data, again, that's
time- tested. That's an ancient
practice. And even in our study, we
found that people who do tongue scraping
have a more diverse oral microbiome, and
they seem to have better oral health.
Why is this? My girlfriend's been
banging on to me. She's always bloody
right. My girlfriend's been banging on
to me about tongue scraping for the last
two years, and I've kind of just ignored
her. I've just kind of Yeah, babe. Sure.
And but when she's not in the bath
bathroom, I'm not using her tongue
scraper because it just looks strange. I
for me based on what I knew about the
oral microbiome and the microbiome
generally I'm like should I be scraping
off all my bacteria?
Well if you're going to plant a garden
do you plant a garden on untilled soil?
Listen I know nothing about gardening.
You're asking the wrong guy. So maybe
yes I grow my own food. Okay. So you
have to till the soil right? You got to
break up the soil so the seeds actually
can be irrated and you just break up
that um that bofilm. Yeah. You take the
back of the dorsal tongue. I mean,
almost to the point of the gag reflex
and you just pull that ideally copper
tongue scraper forward and you're going
to see this goop. Yeah. Coming in there,
but it's it's like kind of like tilling
the soil and it's it's increasing the
diversity of the the dorsal part of the
tongue, the microbiome. So, my
girlfriend was right in that regard.
Yes. But what we found was in that one
kid, we saw the greatest increase in
blood pressure. If you tongue scrape and
use antiseptic mouthwash, that's the
absolute worst scenario.
Interesting. So, if you just think about
this, you're tongue scraping, you're
opening up the pores, and now you're
using mouthwash. It's better to can
easily penetrate deep in the crypts of
the tongue and more effectively kill the
bacteria. So, you want to tongue scrape
and then use a toothbrush without
fluoride toothpaste. Absolutely. And no
mouth, no no antiseptic mouth rinse.
Okay.
And what about going to dental
hygienists and things like that? Do you
think that's a advisable idea? Because
once every quarter or so um I'll go and
see a dental hygienist just to get
everything sort of cleaned out. No, I
think that's a good proactive uh
practice, but you know, because you need
to look at the um the health of the gum
tissue and the the gingal tissue and a
routine clean and scraping the the
plaque off the teeth and allow making
sure you have good mineralization of the
enamel of the tooth is good, but never
let them do a fluoride rinse on you.
Okay. Is there anything else on this
subject of your microbiome and its
relationship with nitric oxide that I
need to be aware of before we move on?
Yeah, we there's also data showing that
if you use mouthwash, you lose the
cardioprotective benefits of
exercise. So, think about this. We know
that diet and exercise is the best
medicine. And many people aspire to do
that. They they go and they they try to
eat good. They avoid the temptations of
sugars and sweets. They exercise every
day to try to increase their longevity
and cardiovascular health. If you do
that and you're using mouthwash, you no
longer get the benefits from exercise.
And we've already established you don't
get the nitric oxide benefits from diet.
So two out of three Americans wake up
every morning and use mouthwash. And two
out of three Americans have an unsafe
elevation in blood pressure. What's the
mechanism there? Well, because you're
you're killing the the the oral
microbiome that's partly responsible for
production of nitric oxide. Without
nitric oxide, you get constriction of
blood vessels and it leads to high blood
pressure. That's crazy. And is there a
link between our hormone levels, things
like my testosterone levels and the
nitric oxide? Yes. So, this is a two-way
street. So, nitro So, in men,
testosterone activates nitric oxide
production. Okay. In women, estrogen
activates and stimulates nitric oxide
production. Okay. So as long as we have
optimal sex hormones and as long as the
enzyme in the lining of the blood vessel
can functionally produce nitric oxide
that explains the cardio protective
benefits of hormone replacement therapy.
Got you. So taking testosterone or um
estrogen
therapies helps to increase my nitro
oxide levels as long as the enzyme is
functional and
coupled which means that we have to we
have to understand the enzyology and the
biochemistry of that reaction to where
when it's exposed to testosterone it the
cell can actually make nitric oxide in
response. And there's a two-way
relationship as well with exercise then
because I've read in your book that um
exercise activates and stimulates nitric
oxide production. But you also just told
me that if you want to get the great
benefits of exercise, you need nitric
oxide in the first place because else
your blood cells are going to be very
narrow, less oxygen traveling through
you're going to do a worse workout as
well presumably. Well, think about I
mean there's other agonist too like
vitamin D. I mean most Americans are
deficient in vitamin D. uh people with
low testosterone have erectile
dysfunction and why is that? Because
they're not stimulating nitric oxide
production and they're not dilating the
blood vessels. So they develop ED. So
all of this, no matter what it is,
whether it's related to vitamin D
deficiency, which is activating and
stimulating of nitric oxide, if it's low
hormones, if it's poor diet, sedentary
lifestyle, all of that can be explained
by insufficient nitric oxide production.
When I think about the role that food
plays in my nitric oxide production,
what should I be eating to increase um
my nitric oxide levels or to keep them
at a healthy level? I think it the same
answer is for that too. It's it's not so
much what we should be eating, it's what
we should not be eating. Okay? So, we
we'll we'll cover those step by step.
Number one, you have to avoid sugar and
high glycemic index
foods because sugar is a toxin. It's a
poison. And let's think about what sugar
is. So when we eat sugar or drink sugar
beverages, right? Whether it's sucrose,
whether it's fructose, whether it's high
fructose corn syrup, the end result
inside the human is we see an increase
in glucose. So elevation in blood sugar
or blood glucose is diabetes, right? And
now there's continuous glucose monitors
that you can get anywhere and everybody
does this. So if you eat something and
it causes an increase in your blood
sugar, blood glucose, then you should
avoid that because glucose as the name
implies is glue, right? It's sticky. And
if we if you have a soda and you spill
it on your countertop, you come back the
next day, it's sticky, right? Well,
that's what happens inside the body.
That sugar sticks to everything. It
sticks to proteins. It sticks to
enzymes. It binds to hemoglobin. And
sugar stuck to hemoglobin is what we
call hemoglobin A1C. And what is that?
It's a it's a marker of long-term
glucose control. If you have hemoglobin
A1C of greater than 5.7, you're
diabetic. So, it's not just hemoglobin
it sticks to. It sticks to the enzyme
that makes nitric
oxide. In in
biochemistry and enzyology, enzymes have
to be able to undergo confirmational
changes, right? So, it transfers
electrons from one donor to an acceptor
and that's how biochemistry is is done.
But if sugar is stuck to that enzyme, it
locks it in some confirmation and it
can't do its job for it can't make
nitric oxide. So, sugar is an absolute
poison and it kills many enzymes and
binds to everything and it lowers nitric
oxide production. Absolutely. That's why
diabetics have a 10 times higher
incidence of heart attack, stroke, all
cause mortality mortality. That's why
they develop neur neurological or
peripheral neuropathy. That's why they
have non-healing wounds. There's no
nitric oxide. That's why they're
developing diabetic retinopathy, macular
degeneration, pancreatitis. I mean, all
of that can be traced back to a lack of
nitric oxide production because the
sugar stuck to the enzyme. the sugar
destroys the oral microbiome and
completely changes the the ecology of
the bacteria and completely shuts down
nitric oxide production.
Just a bit of a tangent there. You
mentioned that's why they have open
wounds that don't Yeah. diabetic ulcers.
Okay. So, nitric oxide's playing a a
role a healing role in wounds and scars.
Absolutely. So, I've got this scar on my
head. I was playing football the other
day. someone ran into the back of my
head and uh they they like they they
passed out and um got taken away by an
ambulance. But I was just left with this
big like scar on the back of my head
which I've had like glue stitched. So
I'm wondering I'm like if I apply the
nitric oxide serum it'll stimulate blood
flow to that. It'll improve cellular
turnover and and heal that wound and
basically remediate the scar. And how do
I do that? Is it Yeah. So you take one
pump from each side. So one pump from
this side and turn it around. One pump
from the other. Yeah. And now if you
apply that and mix it together. As soon
as you mix it together, it starts to
generate nitric oxide gas. So then that
gas will diffuse into that tissue, it's
going to increase blood flow and it's
going to mobilize stem cells and it's
going to improve cellular turnover and
completely remodel that and heal that.
And if it were an infection in there, it
would kill the the the infectious
bacteria.
Okay. Well, we shall
we shall see if that worked. So back on
this point of food then. So sugar's bad.
Sugar's bad. Yeah, you got to eliminate
sugar. And I think the benefits of it
like a straight ketogenic diet or a
straight, you know, vegan vegetarian
diet is just the elimination of sugar
and carbs. Yeah. Right. But I think to
answer your question, what should we be
eating? I think you've got to eat a
balanced diet in moderation. You know,
Americans are overfed. All you got to do
is walk around and see the the epidemic
of obesity. Good high quality protein,
good quality fats, and little or no
carbs. And it's really that simple. And
why did you write a book about
beetroots?
Beets. Yeah. The beets hit the uh really
the airwaves back in 2012 in the London
Olympic Games. Mhm. Uh there was a lot
of data coming out at the time of the
benefits of beetroot juice on enhancing
athletic
performance. And there was a a benefit
of the nitric oxide being produced that
could explain the improvement in
athletic performance.
The problem is these athletes were
drinking liters and liters of beetroot
juice and causing a lot of gastric
discomfort, causing diarrhea. Their
urine and their feces would turn red.
And a lot of people interpreted,
misinterpreted that as gastric bleeds or
urinary
bleeds. And then when I started looking
at the products on the market, most of
the bead products, the desiccated bead
powders provided zero nitric oxide
benefit. They didn't contain any
nitrate, no nitrite. They were just we
called them dead beats. they're they're
a dead beat product. And so I thought if
people if consumers are out there
looking for beets because they've been
shown to enhance their
performance, but that enhancement in
performance was dependent upon the beets
ability to improve nitric oxide
production in the body, then the
non-scientist out there wouldn't know
what to look for, right? They're buying
products that aren't providing any
benefit to them. And so years ago, we
would do randomized placeboc controlled
clinical trials, and we would take some
of these commercial bead products that
you can go to your local nutrition store
or pharmacy, buy off the shelf, and we
would use those as placeos in our
clinical trials because it's the perfect
placebo. So, what I tried to do in that
book is educate, okay, what is it about
beets that are so important? What's the
mechanism and what is necessary in those
beets that can improve nitric oxide
production? So again, everything I do is
intended to educate and inform the
consumer so that they know how to make
informed educated choices on the
products they're taking or the foods
they're eating or their oral hygienic
practices. Trying to find the page in
your book, but there was a page in your
book where you
describe beetroot as the most un as the
most underappreciated food in the
history of eating.
Yeah, that may be in the beat the odds.
Um, I thought it was in this book, but
if you if you go back to historical
times and you look at the the
hieroglyphics on caves of the ancient
cavemen, you know, people thought they
were drinking wine because they would
have these red stuff in this before
battle. But what these ancient Egyptians
were doing was they were drinking beet
juice to improve their performance
before they went into battle so that
they were ready, they were energized,
they improved their circulation. So
that's the historical study on beets and
obviously these were beets grown at a
time when there were no herbicides,
pesticides and the soil was probably
fertile. So these beets were full of
nutrients, probably full of nitrate that
provided the the benefits of that. But
unfortunately today the beets that are
grown at least in America um really are
nutrient depleted just like most of the
food. So would you recommend people eat
beetroots?
No, because as would again through our
survey that we published in 2015, we
realized that you really can't eat
enough beets to get enough nitrate to
improve your performance. And the other
caveat is that if you're using
mouthwash, you've got fluoride in your
toothpaste or fluoride in your drinking
water that you're mixing the beet powder
in, you're not going to get a nitric
oxide benefit from it. There's a graph
in front of me here, which I printed
off, which shows the rise in antacid
medications.
Oh, yeah. from 2004 to so a 20-year
period we're seeing um what is that
almost a
quadrupling of the use of ant acids and
this is globally or is this in the US
that's worldwide I believe yeah
worldwide now this is the problem I mean
these these ant acids what is an antacid
so it's a medication that's given orally
to suppress stomach acid production
and as a biochemist and physiologist I
can't think of nothing more damaging
than to inhibit stomach acid
production because stomach acid is
required to break down proteins into
amino acids. Whether it's you're eating
animal protein or or plant-based
protein, it's required for nutrient
absorption. You need stomach acid to
absorb B vitamins. You need stomach acid
to absorb selenium, chromium, iodine,
magnesium, iron. I mean, most nutrients,
micronutrients are absorbed in the lumen
of the stomach. And if the stomach
cannot is not making stomach acid, then
these nutrients are not absorbed. And
most
Americans, 75% of Americans are
deficient in
magnesium. 95% of Americans are
iodine. I mean, it's a huge problem.
These are the brands like Gavascon.
No, these are like the the prylok, the
previsids, the nexium, the prescription
medications are omerazol, pentopresol.
these you today in in the US I think
it's probably worldwide you don't even
need a prescription for these from your
physician you can go to your local
drugstore and you can buy these what we
call proton pump inhibitors or PPIs what
about Tums over the killer Tums so
there's a difference in so Tums and
things like baking soda are a buffer
right sodium bicarb or calcium carbonate
and it's a buffer right so if you if you
have an acute bout of hyper secretion of
acid. You can take a Tums or some
buffer, some base alkaline substance to
neutralize the acid. Neutralizing acid
is completely different than inhibiting
its natural production in the polyoric
cells of the stomach. So what is the
difference between some have you heard
of gavascon before? Yes. Yeah. What's
the difference between like a gavon?
Well, there's there's certain classes of
ant acids. There's what we call H2
blockers. There's proton pump inhibitors
and then there's the natural buffers
that are just kind of neutralizing the
acid environment in the stomach.
Gavascon I'm trying to think um what
class that falls under. I don't think
it's widely used here in the US. I mean
the main drugs used here are Prolysk
Nexium Previsid. Those are the overthec
counter and then the main prescription
medications are the omeraol and the
pentoresol. Gabaskcon is a commonly used
antacid brand and the active ingredients
are aluminium hydroxide and magnesium
carbonate. Oh, so Gavascon. So number
one, it's got aluminum in it which you
should should absolutely be avoided. Uh
but yeah, that just it looks like a
buffer. It's got an hydroxide, aluminum
hydroxide, which is a strong base. So
it's neutralizing the stomach acid
production. But it's it's a neutralizing
agent. But anything that contains
aluminum, you should absolutely avoid.
Um my as I mentioned her a few times
today, but my girlfriend's a breath
practitioner. She runs a business called
barley breathwork.com hashtag ad. Um and
one of the things she's talked to me a
lot about is mouth breathing. And I know
there's a a relationship between nitric
oxide and how we choose to breathe
whether it's through our nose or through
our mouths. Can you explain to me that
that link? You know, when we talk about
the enzyme that's found in the lining of
the blood vessels, we started this
segment, that same enzyme is found in
our epithelial cells, in our upper
airways, in our sinuses. So, just like
exercise can activate nitric oxide
production in the lining of the blood
vessels. Deep breathing, nasal breathing
activates that enzyme in the epithelial
cells of our sinuses. And so, when we do
nasal breathing, it's activating the
enzyme to make nitric oxide. And now
we're delivering that nitric oxide gas
into the the bronchules, the lower
airway. It's dilating those bronchioles.
Moreover, it's dilating the pulmonary
arteries. So now we're improving oxygen
uptake, oxygen delivery. And that's why
nasal breathing and deep breathing has
been shown to lower blood pressure. This
is a pretty crazy graph I took from
Google as well, which shows just how
interested people are now getting in the
subject of mouth breathing. Oh yeah.
Again, going over the past uh 20 years.
Yeah. I know I think there's a lot of
people I mean obviously your girlfriend
there's a Patrick Mchuan Mchuan in um Oh
yeah the UK came into Dragon's Den I and
I uh did a made a minoffer in Dragon's
Den. Yeah. Yeah. No, I think that the
the the benefits of that are pretty well
and mechanistically we understand the
benefits of it. So the the mouth
breathers are not only bypassing this
natural nitric oxide production pathway
but when you mouth breathe it completely
changes the
microbiome. And you so you're not only
bypassing the nitric oxide producing in
the upper airway, but you're inhibiting
nitric oxide production in the mouth
from the microbiome because you're fully
oxygenating the mouth. It's changing the
pH of the saliva and completely changes
the microbiome and completely shuts down
nitric oxide production.
Interesting. Interesting.
So, so you have to I mean I'm a big fan
of of mouth taping, but for me I know
and I watch my kids, but sometimes
there's anatomical issues where there's
obstructive airways and airway
obstruction that has to be corrected by
dental appliances or some sometimes
surgery. But the worst thing you can do
is tape your mouth and your airway be
constricted and you know suffocate. So
before you do mouth taping, you need to
get um you know some some imaging done
from your dentist to make sure that your
airway is is open to where if you forced
to breathe through your nose, you can
actually have oxygen exchange. And is
there anything else that I could and
should be doing to increase and improve
my nitric oxide levels that we haven't
talked about yet? Humming. You know,
there are certain frequencies um we've
done this and looking at nitric oxide
coming out of the exhaled breath when
you're humming. So certain frequencies
can activate this enzyme and it's
dependent upon the volume of the nasal
sinuses. So there's not one frequency
that would work in every single person
because the volume of your airways and
and oral cavity and sinuses was probably
much different than mine. Give me an
example. Show me. Well, if you just, you
know, like ohms, like you do in
meditation or just simple humming, you
could actually, so if I had my ozone or
gasphase analyzer here, I could
hum and I could detect nitric oxide
coming out of my exhaled breath because
of the frequency of the because of the
frequency and activating the the nitric
oxide synthes enzyme. But if you take
older patients and we've demonstrated
this, it's published years ago and other
other groups have demonstrated this
older patients that their enzyme isn't
making nitric oxide. Whether they do
nasal breathing or whether they do
humming, there's no nitric oxide coming
out. So again, this is an activator and
a stimulator, but it's dependent upon
the function of the enzyme that makes
nitric oxide. If your enzyme is broken,
humming, nasal breathing, exercise isn't
going to produce any nitric oxide. Is
there anything else that I should be
aware of if I'm trying to improve my
nitric oxide levels?
I think it's it's it's doing the things
that disrupt it. Get rid of fluoride,
get rid of mouthwash, stop using ant
acids, stop eating sugar, anything that
leads to an elevation in blood sugar, a
balanced diet in moderation, moderate
physical exercise, 20 to 30 minutes of
sunlight a day. Sunlight. Sunlight.
there are certain at both both ends of
the visible spectrum both or the UV
spectrum and the um full spectrum
infrared. So those frequencies and
vibrations again stimulate nitric oxide
release. So the UV has enough energy to
where it'll it'll knock nitric oxide
bound to a cysteine and protein and then
the UV spectrum will release nitric
oxide bound to metals. So, you mean go
out in the sunshine, but also those red
light beds and stuff? Yeah, the red
light I have an inf I have a red light
bed. I have an infrared sauna that uses
red lights in it and it's I use it every
day for nitric oxide production. Yeah.
And there's there's other benefits of
light. You know, it can stimulate
mitochondrial biogenesis. It improves
energy production. It can lower blood
pressure. But yeah, lots of benefits of
light therapy. And yet, we're programmed
to not go outside. If we go outside, put
on SPF 60, and intoxicate oursel with
these cancer-causing chemicals and
sunscreen, I mean, makes no sense.
What is the most important thing we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about today, Dr. Nathan? You
know, I think the future of Well, I I
don't think I'm I'm I know. You know,
there's three levels of conviction. You
think, you believe, and you know. I'm at
the point of knowing now that the future
of medicine and health care around the
globe is going to be dependent upon
nitric oxide product technology because
I think we can inform and instruct
people to stop doing things or start
doing things. But the most difficult
thing to do is to change people's habits
and to get people out of their comfort
zone and stop drinking sugar soda
waters. eliminate sugar to the best
extent possible, get 20, 30 minutes of
exercise a day, and completely change
your
diet. Compliance is an issue. People
don't do that. They we're we're
programmed to want to take a pill to
overcome everything. And there's that
pill, nitric oxide is very important,
but it's not a silver bullet. It's not
going to overcome all your bad habits,
but what it is going to do, it's going
to correct a lot of the things that your
bad habits are leading to a deficiency
of. Well, it's a good thing we have um a
lot of people that are devoted
to finding new solutions to old problems
and you're certainly one of those
people. And it's super fascinating
because as you say, as I said at the
start of this conversation, I had no
idea about any of this stuff beforehand.
I had no idea I'd not really even heard
that the word nitric oxide. And maybe
I'd heard it in passing, but um maybe I
was confusing it with that NOS gas that
people talk about and that some people
inhale. And maybe because I hadn't added
context and story and understanding to
it, maybe I'd heard it in passing but
didn't know what it was or meant. So,
it's really wonderful that you're
leading the charge in educating the
world on nitric oxide because it's
clearly a a really really important
molecule in the the broader picture of
our health. And the more we understand
it, the more we ask questions about it
and have curiosity about it, the higher
the probability that we're going to be
able to build some of these therapies
that prevent us from ending up in a
state as we've seen in some of these
graphs where we're deficient in nitric
oxide and then have to deal with the
downstream consequences of that. So,
thank you for all the work that you're
doing. It's really, really important.
I'm going to ask you one final question,
which is the question left by our
previous guest, Kim. They don't know who
they're leaving it for, and they write
it into this diary. So the question
that's been left for you
is are you happily or unhappily mated
and why? Happily or unhappily mated? You
know, one of my biggest challenges in
life is maintaining balance, right?
because I've been so focused
on, you know, discovery and research and
leaving a lasting legacy and and making
innovations and and doing doing things
in the scientific and medical community
that many people said couldn't be done.
And so my the problem is is there's
always a deficiency. You know, I've got
young kids. I spend a lot of a lot of
time away. And you know, that's you
know, I'm happily mated, but there's
deficiencies, right? Because again my
challenge is always maintaining balance
work, home life kind of maintaining you
know my spiritual my you know it's it's
it's it's mental it's physical and it's
spiritual health I'm trying to do better
at that now but you know you can't
there's always sacrifice right and we
just have to pick pick our sacrifices
and you know so I've got to I've got to
choose to do better. Yeah, everything
has a trade-off as many of my guests
have told me. Thank you so much for the
work that you do. Where do people if
people want to find out more about you,
if they want to read more, they should
certainly get this book which you've
just released called The Secret of
Nitric Oxide. Um, I'll link it below for
anyone that wants to have a read of this
book. I highly recommend you do because
it gives an even more comprehensive
understanding of everything we've talked
about today and it's incredibly
accessible, which is always critically
important to me. Um, but if they want to
find out more, if they want to
understand the products that you you
sell and anything else, where do they
go? Well, I I mean, obviously I'm I'm
here to educate and informal nitric
oxide. You know, this latest book, The
Secret of Nitric oxide, bringing the
science to life, really chronicles both
my kind of journey through science and
medicine as you revealed kind of my
early years and kind of what motivated
me to go into space. But I think more
importantly, it tells the story of
nitric oxide, what it is, what led to a
Nobel Prize for its discovery, what you
can do to prevent the loss of this
molecule. So, you can go to
nathan'sbook.com or you can get it
anywhere books are sold, Amazon, Barnes
& Noble. I've got a YouTube channel, Dr.
Nathan S. Brian, nitric oxide, where we
provide education, information, latest
scientific information on nitric oxide.
You can find me on social media,
Instagram, Dr. Nathan S. Brian and then
for those who want to follow our product
journey and you know bringing forth safe
and effective product technology that's
none.com. So it's the letter N the
number one letter number one.com. But
you know we make products that release
nitric oxide. Dr. Nathan Brian thank you
so much for your time today being so
incredibly generous but thank you so
much for educating the world in such an
articulate and accessible way on a
subject that few of us knew very little
about. It's incredibly important work
and it's gonna it's inspired me to think
again about my diet and about the
decisions I make, the habits I have
about exercise, about sunlight exposure,
about my oral microbiome, all of these
things. So, thank you so much for that.
It's a real gift and I appreciate you
taking the time today. Well, thank you
so much. It's pleasure being with you.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribe to the
show. If you like the show and you like
what we do here and you want to support
us, the free simple way that you can do
just that is by hitting the subscribe
button. And my commitment to you is if
you do that, then I'll do everything in
my power, me and my team, to make sure
that this show is better for you every
single week. We'll listen to your
feedback. We'll find the guests that you
want me to speak to, and we'll continue
to do what we do. Thank you so much.
[Music]